# Technical documentation

## Overview

BCODMONT is an OBO style application ontology created using the [Ontology Development Kit \(ODK\)](https://github.com/INCATools/ontology-development-kit). As such it makes use of a variety of features generated by ODK such as ontology imports a standardized makefile and githhub release-generation. 

The **B**CODMO **S**emantic **M**odel \(**BSM**\) is created within BCODMONT and acts as a controlled vocabulary for the BCODMO data managers to annotate data with. 



## Imports

In order to re-use ontology terms form existing OBO ontologies such as ENVO, UBERON or CHEBI, we need to import them into our repository. 

### Add new terms to import

In order to import new terms from ontologies we are already importing from we need to do the following:

#### Running all imports

We can run all existing imports from `bcodmont/src/ontology` with the following command: 

```text
./run.sh make all_imports
```

Note when running on linux systems depending on permissions one may need to add `sudo` in front of the above command. 

#### Running individual imports

To re-run an individual ontology \(instead of all imported ontologies\) one can run a command such as the following, where for example the Gene Ontology `go` is the ontology of interest. One would run the following from `bcodmont/src/ontology`: \(note `sudo` maybe required\)

```text
./run.sh make imports/go_import.owl
```



### Import new ontologies

In order to import a new OBO ontology we need to do the following:



## Preparing new BSM terms



#### Basics about Robot templates

Robot templates are structured as follows, the first row contains `headers`, these are human-readable labels that are not complied by robot. These can be renamed as needed. The second row contains the `templates` which must contain strings formatted as specified in the [Robot template documentation](https://robot.obolibrary.org/template). Please do not change these. All subsequent rows are for the addition of new terms or the modification of existing ones.



#### Ontology IDs

In order for a term \(a row in the spreadsheet\) to be recognized by robot and compiled into owl code, it must have an entry in the `ontology ID` column. This must either include a BCODMO Semantic Model \(BSM\) ID, or an ID from another OBO ontology. BSM terms must start with the prefix `BSM:` and be followed by seven digits e.g., `BSM:0200001`. BSM IDs must be within an appropriate numeric ID range as specified within the [BCODMO\_SM/idranges.owl](https://github.com/BCODMO/bcodmont/blob/main/src/ontology/BCODMO_SM/idranges.owl) file. 

Imported terms from other OBO ontologies such as ENVO, UBERON, GO etc must follow this same formatting, e.g, with imported ENVO terms one must use the prefix `ENVO:` followed by the correct identifier number, e.g. `ENVO:03000102`. This is refereed to as the `curie` ID formatting style. 

